
XTAG English Grammar - Release 2.14.2001
----------------------------------------

WHAT'S NEW IN THE GRAMMAR
*************************

This report contains a brief description of the more significant changes
made to the Xtag grammar since its last release in 1998. Where necessary, a
reference is made to a more detailed discussion in the relevant part of the
Technical Report.

I : REMOVAL OF EMPTY ELEMENTS AS ANCHORS
****************************************

Until recently, the grammar contained trees that were selected by empty
elements from the lexicon. In the current grammar, some of these entries
(and in some cases, the tree templates associated with them) have been
removed.

     (1) Relative clauses: Complementizers in relative clauses were handled
         earlier with a substitution node labeled COMP built-in into the
         relative clause tree. An initial tree, alpha-Comp, was selected by
         complementizer elements from the lexicon and then substituted into
         the COMP node. The choice between overt and non-overt
         complementizers was handled by allowing an empty element to select
         the alpha-Comp tree too, so that we were able to handle relative
         clauses like "the cat the dog killed". 
         
                In removing empty COMP element from the lexicon and
                maintain the coverage of relative clauses at the same time,
                we have changed the analysis of complementizers in relative
                clauses. The COMP node is no longer built-in into the tree
                (note that this has also eliminated the use of the
                alpha-Comp initial tree, since it was used only in relative
                clauses), but is rather handled by adjunction (with the
                beta-COMPs auxiliary tree), in a manner parallel to
                sentential complementation. The choice between overt and
                non-overt COMP is handled simply by either allowing
                adjunction or not allowing it, and this is taken care of
                through linguistically motivated feature constraints. The
                nature of the constraints imposed on the complementizer in
                relative clauses is of course different from that used for
                sentential complementation. For a more detailed discussion,
                see Chapter 8 on Sentential Complementation and Chapter 16
                on Relative Clauses.

     (2) PRO and empty auxiliary verbs: The Xtag lexicon also contained
         non-lexical PRO which selected the intial tree alpha-NP and was
         used to substitute into the subject NP node in
         infinitivals. Furthermore, this treatment of PRO also motivated
         simulation of multi-component adjunction for inverted sentences
         (yes-no questions, wh-questions, and imperatives), in order to
         handle the proper assignment of case features with inversion. In
         particular, the auxiliary verb tree (betaVvx), selected by an
         empty element, adjoined in at VP whenever an auxiliary verb tree
         (beta-Vs) adjoined at S.

                  In the current analysis for PRO, we have removed the PRO
                  entry in the lexicon and built separate trees in each
                  tree family with PRO built-in at the subject NP node. In
                  particular, there is a PRO tree for every construction
                  type that can have a PRO subject. Typically, the PRO
                  trees in a family appear for the declarative construction
                  and the gerund. To see the distribution of PRO trees in
                  the different tree families, see Chapters 5 and 6.

                  Removing the analysis of PRO as substitution has also
                  obviated the need for simulating multi-component
                  adjunction in inverted sentences. In the current grammar,
                  therefore, the verbal auxiliary trees that adjoin to VP
                  (beta-Vvx) are not selected by empty elements.
                  
There is still one more empty element in the grammar. This is the empty
subordinating conjunction which is used to handle bare adjunct clauses like
"Drinking the wine, Mary walked over to Bill" (see Chapter 17). We are
currently working towards removing this element too.


II : EXTENSION OF IMPERATIVES
*****************************

Previously, imperatives in the Xtag grammar could only handle affirmative
imperatives without do-support like "eat!" and "eat the cake!". The
coverage of this construction has now been extended to include do-support
("do sit down") and negative imperatives ("Don't touch the
water!"). Furthermore, as mentioned above, the simulation of
multi-component adjunction with do-support is no longer present. For more
discussion, see Chapter 18.

III : ADDITION OF RESULTATIVES
******************************

The current grammar has been extended to handle Resultative constructions
("John pounded the metal flat"). The analysis treats the verb and result
predicate as a complex predicate. Four tree families have been added to the
grammar for resultatives. In two of the families, the verb in the complex
predicate is transitive or intransitive, and the result is either
adjectival or prepositional. In the other two families, the verb is
ergative and the result is again either adjectival or prepositional. The
number of lexical items of these complex verb-result predicates that select
these families will be extended in the next version. For more discussion of
the resultatives, see Chapter 13.


IV : ADDITION OF MORE SEMI-AUXILIARIES
**************************************

We have added a treatment of semi-auxiliaries that are derived from
non-verbal elements, like the adverb in "be about to". The adverbial
semi-auxiliaries are handled by a new auxiliary tree (beta-Vvx-ARB) that is
anchored by the adverb "about" and which is constrained with features to
adjoin to an infinitive VP. For more discussion, see Chapter 22, Section
22.5.2.

V : EXTENSION OF PARTICIPIAL NP PRE-MODIFIERS
*********************************************

Previously, the grammar could only handle past participial NP modifiers,
like "the devoured meal", which are derived from transitive verbs and are
part of the transitive tree family. We have extended the treatment of
participial NP modifiers to include present-continuous modifiers that are
derived from intransitive ("the drinking man") and ergative ("the melting
ice") verbs and are now part of the intransitive and ergative tree families
respectively. For more discussion, see Chapter 21, Section 21.2.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
